# 42_Fractol_Resources
> Computer Graphics Fractals

<!-- mtoc-start -->

* [Complex Numbers](#complex-numbers)
  * [Initializing a Complex Number](#initializing-a-complex-number)
  * [Deriving the Formula for Squaring a Complex Number](#deriving-the-formula-for-squaring-a-complex-number)
* [Fractal Sets](#fractal-sets)
  * [The Mandelbrot Set](#the-mandelbrot-set)
    * [Generating the Mandelbrot Set](#generating-the-mandelbrot-set)
* [Generating the Newton-Raphson Set](#generating-the-newton-raphson-set)
  * [Seeking Polynomial Roots](#seeking-polynomial-roots)
  * [Newton's Method](#newtons-method)
  * [Differences & Improved Guesses (Step Size)](#differences--improved-guesses-step-size)
  * [The Newton-Raphson Method](#the-newton-raphson-method)
  * [Finding Roots in the Complex Plane](#finding-roots-in-the-complex-plane)
  * [Many Seed, Many Guesses](#many-seed-many-guesses)
  * [Curiosities of the Complex Plane](#curiosities-of-the-complex-plane)
  * [But what the Chaos is going on here!?](#but-what-the-chaos-is-going-on-here)
  * [The Boundary is the Key](#the-boundary-is-the-key)
* [Fractal Generation Techniques](#fractal-generation-techniques)
  * [Escape-Time Fractals](#escape-time-fractals)
  * [Iterated Function Systems](#iterated-function-systems)
  * [Random Fractals](#random-fractals)
  * [Orbit Trap Method](#orbit-trap-method)
* [Refs](#refs)
  * [Docs](#docs)
  * [MiniLibX](#minilibx)
  * [Articles](#articles)
    * [Real Numbers](#real-numbers)
    * [Value of i](#value-of-i)
  * [Math Utils](#math-utils)
* [Repos](#repos)
* [Tools](#tools)
* [Videos](#videos)
* [LaTeX](#latex)
* [Footnotes](#footnotes)

<!-- mtoc-end -->
## Complex Numbers

### Initializing a Complex Number

> $Z = a + bi$
>
> where
>
> $a$ = Real part;
>
> $b$ = Imaginary part;
>
> $i^2 = -1$  || $i = \sqrt{-1}$
>

### Deriving the Formula for Squaring a Complex Number

> $(x + yi)^2 =$
>
> $= (x + yi) * (x + yi)$
>
> $= x^2 + xyi + xyi + y^2i^2$
>
> $= x^2 + 2xyi - y^2$
>
> $= x^2 - y^2 + 2xyi$

___
## Fractal Sets

Julia & Mandelbrot Sets are defined by:

> $Z_{n+1} = Z_{n} + c$

Z = a Complex number at n-th iteration;
c = Constant complex number corresponding to a point in the complex plane.
### The Mandelbrot Set
Was discovered by Benoit B. Mandelbrot while investigating mappings of the function:
> $f(z) = z^2 + c$

Is generated by iterating a simple function on the points of the complex plane.
- Points that `produce a cycle` (the same value over and over again) fall in the set;
- Points that `diverge` (give ever-growing values) lie outside it [Different colors represent different rates of diversion].
#### Generating the Mandelbrot Set

- Start from point $Z_0$ of the complex plane;
- Use the quadratic recurrence equation $Z_{n+1} = Z_{n}^2 + Z_{0}$ to obtain a sequence of complex numbers $Z_{n}$;

> - The points $Z_{n}$ are said to form the orbit of $Z_{0}$;
> - The Mandelbrot set, denoted by `M` is defined:
>
> If the orbit $Z_n$ fails to go to infinity,
>
> > we say that $Z_{n}$ is contained within the set $M$.
> > real numbers that are contained within the set to be in between $-2$ and $1/4$
> > imaginary numbers on the other hand have to be in between $-0.6i$ and $0.6i$
>
> If the orbit $Z_n$ does go to infinity,
>
> > we say that the point $Z_{0}$ is outside $M$.## The Julia Set

___
## Generating the Newton-Raphson Set

The Newton-Raphson Set is an infinite family of fractals generated by the iterative Newton-Raphson method of solving polynomials.

The starting point will be to assume some kind of polynomial and then find its roots (When the equation solves to zero).

> Example.: $P(x) = x^5 + x^2 - x - 0.2 = 0$

This polynomial has 3 roots:

> $P(x) = -1.193$
>
> $P(x) = -0.1709$
>
> $P(x) = 0.8119$
>
> > Check out its [graph](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/fksk7o2p5l)!

### Seeking Polynomial Roots

But how do we compute the roots? This is a very common question in engineering and computer graphics.

> [!Note]
>
> For instance in compute graphics, the text on the screen is usually not defined using pixel values, instead they are defined as a bunch of polynomial curves know as `bezier curves`.
>
> [Bezier Curves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A9zier_curve)

If the problem at hand involves a quadratic function, then we can use the quadratic formula:

> **Quadratic Function**
>
> $ax^2 + bx + c = 0;$
>
> **Quadratic Polynomial Formula**
>
> $r_1,r_2 = \dfrac{-b ± \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}$

> [!Note]
>
> This formula is ubiquitously used to calculate light effects and general 3D manipulation during the production of games and animation movies.
>
> **Learn More**:
> - [Quadratic Polynomial Formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadratic_formula)
> - [3D GRAPHING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS WITH SIMULATION METHODOLOGY](https://www.globusjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/GMIT-JD15-Rajeev.pdf)
> - [General Quadratic Equation in 3-D](https://www.maplesoft.com/support/help/maple/view.aspx?path=MathApps%2FGeneralQuadraticEquationIn3D)

There is also a Cubic Polynomial Formula that can be applied to Cubic Functions:

> **Cubic Formula**
>
> $x^3 +px + q = 0;$
>
> **Cubic Polynomial Formula**
>
> $root = \sqrt[3]{-\dfrac{q}{2} + \sqrt{\dfrac{q^2}{4} + \dfrac{p^3}{27}}} + \sqrt[3]{-\dfrac{q}{2} - \sqrt{\dfrac{q^2}{4} + \dfrac{p^3}{27}}}$
>
> **Learn More**
> - [Mathologer : 500 years of NOT teaching THE CUBIC FORMULA. What is it they think you can't handle?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-KXStupwsc)

Now, you might be wondering about higher order polynomial formulas.

- A Quartic formula exists but no one really uses it in practice due to its complexity.
- After that, there is no analogous formula to solve Quintic or higher order polynomials. This is know as the **Unsolvability of the Quintic**.

In other words, it is possible to prove that for an extensive set of standard functions (that use $+$, $-$, $*$, $/$, and $\sqrt[n]{ }$, $sin$, $cos$, $exp$, $log$, etc), there is no way to combine them together that allows us to plug in the coefficients of quintic polynomial and always get out a root.

This unsolvability issue in a way doesn't matter because we have other ways to approximate a solution to this kind of equation with whatever level of precision necessary.

A common way to achieve this is by applying **Newton's Method**.

___
### Newton's Method

Take our previous polynomial example:

> $P(x) = x^5 + x^2 - x - 0.2 = 0$

The algorithm starts with a random guess, let's call it $X_0$.

Most likely the initial output of our polynomial at $X_0$ will not be 0, so we haven't found the solution.

> Guess : $x_0 = 1.3$

This return value is some other value that represents the **height** of the curve at $X_0$.

To improve the guess, we have to ask,

> **When does the linear approximation to the function around that value equal zero?**
>
> In other words, if we were to draw a tangent line to the graph at this point, when does this tangent line cross the x-axis?

Assuming that this tangent is a decent approximation of the function in the general vicinity of some true root, the  spot where this approximation equals zero should bring us closer to a true root.

As long as we are able to take a derivative of this function, (which with polynomials is always a possibility) we can compute the slope of this linear approximation.

### Differences & Improved Guesses (Step Size)

Then how do we find out the difference between the current guess and an improved guess? **What is the size of this step?**

One way to think about this, is to consider the fact that the slope of the tangent line, it's rise being greater than the run, suggests the **height of this graph divided by the length of the step**.

> **Slope / Tangent**
>
> $Slope = \dfrac{P(x_0)}{-Step}$

On the other hand the slope of this tangent line is the derivative of the polynomial at that point.

> **Derivative**
>
> $P'(x_0) =\dfrac{P(x_0)}{-Step}$
>
> > Taking our previous polynomial example:
> >
> > $P(x) = x^5 + x^2 - x - 0.2 = 0$
> >
> > We get its derivative as:
> >
> > $P'(x) = 5x^4 + 2x - 1$

So if we rearrange this equation $P'(x_0) =\dfrac{P(x_0)}{-Step}$, we get a simple expression that gives us the ability to compute this step size:

> $Step = \dfrac{P(x_0)}{P'(x_0)}$

So the next guess will be $X_1$ adjusted by the step size:

$X_1 = X_0 - \dfrac{P(x_0)}{P'(x_0)}$

After that we can repeat the process. We compute the value of this function and the slope at this new guess, which gives us a new linear approximation. Then make the next guess $x_2$, wherever that tangent line crosses the x-axis.

> Guess : $x_2 = 1.054$

Repeat this process enough times and before too long you'll find yourself extremely close to a true root.

___

So the formula to calculate the next step size is:

> **Step Size Formula**
>
> $x_{n+1} = x_n - \dfrac{P(x_0)}{P'(x_0)}$

___
A few intuitions worthy of note:
- If $P(x_0)$ is really large, and the graph gets real high, we need to take a larger step to get closer to a true root.
- But if $P'(x_0)$ is also really large, making the slope of the graph steeper, we need to take a smaller step to get closer to a true root.
- While it works great when we start calculations near a root, where it converges really quickly, if your initial guess is far from a root it can find a couple weaknesses.
	- In some cases the sequence of new guesses that we get bounces around the local minimum of a function sitting above the x-axis.
	- This makes sense since the linear approximation of the function around these values all the way to the right, is entirely unrelated to the nature of the function around its true root. It gives no useful information about the true root.
	- It is only when by chance this process is able to throw the new guess off far enough to the left that the sequence of new guesses is able to approximate the true root.

___
### The Newton-Raphson Method

This was a method used by Newton to solve polynomial expressions. He made it look much more complicated than it needed to be. Luckily a few years later Joseph Rafson published a simpler, more accessible version much more alike to the method we are discussing. Because of this it is commonly known as the **Newton-Raphson Method**, a recurrent topic in calculus classes.

___
### Finding Roots in the Complex Plane

Even if a polynomial has only a single real number root, we can always factor it into five terms if we allow the roots to be complex numbers:

> $P(x) = x^5 + x^2 - x - 0.2 = 0$
>
> $P(x) = (x - r_0)(x - r_1)(x - r_2)(x - r_3)(x - r_4)$
>
> Where $r_n = a_n + b_ni$

> This is the **Fundamental Theorem of Algebra**, proved by Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1799. It states that every polynomial equation of degree n with complex number coefficients has n roots, or solutions, in the complex numbers.
> - [Fundamental Theorem of Algebra - Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/science/fundamental-theorem-of-algebra)

In the context of functions with real number inputs and outputs, where one can picture the association between inputs and outputs as a graph, Newton's method has straightforward visual meaning with tangent lines intersecting the x-axis.

But if we want to allow these inputs to be complex numbers, in turn making the output a complex number, we can't think about tangent lines and graphs anymore.

Good news is, the formula doesn't care how you visualize it. You can plug Newton's equations with complex numbers, starting with a random guess, then evaluating the polynomial at this point as well as its derivative, then using this update rule to generate a new guess.

> $P(z) = z^5 + z^2 - z - 0.2 = 0$
>
> Arbitrary Seed: $z_0 = 0.5 + 0.5i$
>
> $z_1 = z_0 - \dfrac{P(z_0)}{P'(z_0)}$
>
> $z_2 = z_1 - \dfrac{P(z_1)}{P'(z_1)}$

> [!Note]
>
> Even though it is not possible to easily visualize this process, it really is the same logic. We are figuring out where a linear approximation of the function around our guess would equal zero, and then we use that zero of the linear approximation as our next guess.  

___
### Many Seed, Many Guesses

We can apply this idea to many different possible initial guesses simultaneously. With each iteration each dot takes some step based on **Newton's Method**.

Most of the dots will quickly converge to one of the five roots, but there will be some dots which will start bouncing around. This is the same behavior we saw as when we got stuck bouncing around the local minimum of a function when applying the method to the same polynomial using real numbers.

If we did this for every single dot on the plane and then color each dot based on which of those five roots it ended up closest to, the result would be an intricate colorful fractal.

___
### Curiosities of the Complex Plane

There are regions in the complex plane where if you ever so slightly adjust that seed value, it can completely change which of the five true roots a given dot ends up landing on. We saw some for shadowing of this kind of chaos when discussing intuitions related to the real graph and certain the problematic sequences of guesses. But visualizing this on the comp+lx planes trully shines a light on how unpredictable this business of root finding really can be, and how there is an infinity of initial values where this sort of unpredictability can arise.

Chaos happens at the boundaries between regions.

___
### But what the Chaos is going on here!?

Yeah, what is it? All we are doing here is solving linear approximations, why would that produce something so endlessly complex?

A reasonable initial guess might have been that each seed value simply tends towards whichever root it's closes to, but if tit was the case, the final image would look like a Voronoi diagrams with straight line boundaries.

> Learn More:
> - [Voronoi Diagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voronoi_diagram)

Maybe you are wondering if the **Unsolvability of the Quintic** mentioned earlier has anything to do with this weirdness, but it doesn't, they are unrelated ideas.  

The degree-5 polynomial given earlier as an example may have been slightly misleading. 

If we spin up the process with a cubic polynomial like $P(z) = z^3 - 1$, we get three roots somewhere in the complex plane. The outcome of this is a three-fold fractal pattern with infinite detail.

However quadratic polynomials are different, in that case each seed value simply tends towards whichever root it's closest to as expected. All the points at an equal distance to the roots are "unable to decide" which root to go and get stuck in a line of points. The output is a split two color screen.

So, something new does happen when we go from quadratic to cubic polynomials. The question is what exactly changes?

There is a reasonable explanation as to why these images have to look as complicated as they do. 

___
### The Boundary is the Key

The key to answering this question is to look at the boundary between regions.

When I mention the word "boundary" you have an intuitive sense of what it means, but mathematicians have a clever way to formalize it that makes it easier to reason when exploring wilder sets like the fractal we are discussing.

> We say that a point is on the boundary of a set if when you draw a small circle centered at that point, no matter how small, it will always contain points that are both inside that set and outside of it.

If we select a point on the interior of the boundary, a small enough circle would eventually only contain points inside the set, and for a point on the exterior, a small enough circle would contain no points from the set.

But when the point is on the boundary, the circle will contain both points inside and outside of the set.

> One way to formulate this is to say, you draw a circle, no matter how small that circle, it either contains all of the colors (when the shared boundary is inside the circle), or it contains just one color (when the circle is in the interior of a region).

What this implies is that you shouldn't be able to find a circle that just contains two of the colors, since that would require you to have points on the boundary between two regions, but not all of them.

This property tells us that, if we are near a sensitive point where some of the seed values go to one root but other seed values go to another, then every root must be accessible by the points in the vicinity of that sensitive point. For any circle you draw, all the points will either tend to one root, or they will tend to all of the roots, they will just tend to a subset of the roots.

But why would this property be true? Where does it come from?

It comes from a field of math called Holomorphic Dynamics


____


> It's funny that we call this fractal Newton's fractal even though Newton never knew about it's existence.

___
## Fractal Generation Techniques
### Escape-Time Fractals
### Iterated Function Systems
### Random Fractals
### Orbit Trap Method

___
## Refs
### Docs
- [42Docs](https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/)
- [Fractals Educators Guide](https://fractalfoundation.org/fractivities/FractalPacks-EducatorsGuide.pdf)
- [Lode's Computer Graphics Tutorial : Julia Mandelbrot Set](https://lodev.org/cgtutor/juliamandelbrot.html)
- [Newtown's Fractal](https://young.physics.ucsc.edu/242/newton.pdf)
- [Newton-Raphson Equations Solutions](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/newton-raphson-method#:~:text=The%20Newton%2DRaphson%20method%20begins,0%20crosses%20the%20x%2Daxis.)
- [Mathologer : 500 years of NOT teaching THE CUBIC FORMULA. What is it they think you can't handle?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-KXStupwsc)
### MiniLibX
- [minilibx-linux](https://github.com/42Paris/minilibx-linux)
- [minilibx : harm-smits Docs](https://harm-smits.github.io/42docs/libs/minilibx/getting_started.html)
- [minilibx : ilkou Docs](https://github.com/ilkou/minilibx)
- [minilibx : 42-cursus Docs](https://42-cursus.gitbook.io/guide/minilibx)
- [events-with-the-minilibx](https://aurelienbrabant.fr/blog/events-with-the-minilibx)
- [minilibx (in Rust)](https://docs.rs/minilibx/latest/minilibx/)
- [minilibx : ft_libgfx](https://github.com/qst0/ft_libgfx?tab=readme-ov-file)
- [minilibx : Gontjarow](https://gontjarow.github.io/MiniLibX/)
### Articles
- [Fractal - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractal)
- [History of Fractals](https://nnart.org/history-of-fractals/)
- [What is Wonderdraft?](https://nnart.org/what-is-wonderdraft/)
- [Understanding Julia and Mandelbrot Sets](https://www.karlsims.com/julia.html)
- [Tag: Complex Numbers — Acko.net](https://acko.net/tag/complex-numbers/)
- [Complex Analysis](https://complex-analysis.com/content/mandelbrot_set.html)
- [Classica Iterated Function Systems](https://larryriddle.agnesscott.org/ifs/ifs.htm)
#### Real Numbers
- [Real Numbers (Definition, Properties and Examples)](https://byjus.com/maths/real-numbers/)
#### Value of i
- [Value of i in Complex Numbers - Powers of i Chart](https://byjus.com/maths/value-of-i/)
- [Value of I - Commonly Used Values of i](https://www.vedantu.com/maths/value-of-i)
### Math Utils
- [How to scale down a range of numbers with a known min and max value](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5294955/how-to-scale-down-a-range-of-numbers-with-a-known-min-and-max-value)
## Repos
- [fract-ol: graphically beautiful fractals | Medium](https://medium.com/@leogaudin/fract-ol-creating-graphically-beautiful-fractals-6664b6b045b5)
- [fract-ol — render beautiful sets. | by Braulio Santos | Jan, 2024 | Medium](https://medium.com/@by1jorgesantos/fract-ol-render-beautiful-sets-0699a378b953)
- [GitHub - agavrel/42-fractol: Infographic \~ Fractal](https://github.com/agavrel/42-fractol)
- [GitHub - Alexdelia/42-fract-ol: 42 project around 2D fractal in minilibx](https://github.com/Alexdelia/42-fract-ol)
- [GitHub - aamaral-42/42_fract-ol: 42 project](https://github.com/aamaral-42/42_fract-ol)
## Tools
- [Online graphing calculator — NumWorks](https://www.numworks.com/simulator/)
## Videos
- [Idiot's guide to fractals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gfVmtaOUER8)
- [What's so special about the Mandelbrot Set? - Numberphile](https://youtu.be/FFftmWSzgmk?si=QebM2_Ny866hULFQ)
- [The dark side of the Mandelbrot set - Mathologer](https://youtu.be/9gk_8mQuerg?si=mCjcqvcn6kVsQN8Y)
- [Playlist about everything and anything Mandelbrot and Julia](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MotVcGvFMg&list=PL9tHLTl03LqG4ajDvqyfCDMKSxmR_plJ3)
- [Beyond the Mandelbrot set, an intro to holomorphic dynamics](https://youtu.be/LqbZpur38nw?si=7gpxDJIpsfJYp_0m)
- [Draw a Pollock painting with the minilibX](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9eAPbNUQD1Y)
- [Introduction to the minilibX : a simple X-Window programming API in C](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bYS93r6U0zg&t=0s)
## LaTeX
- https://wch.github.io/latexsheet/latexsheet-0.png
- [users.dickinson.edu/\~richesod/latex/latexcheatsheet.pdf](https://users.dickinson.edu/~richesod/latex/latexcheatsheet.pdf)
- [LaTeX/Mathematics - Wikibooks, open books for an open world](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Mathematics)
- [Markdown and LaTeX introduction](https://ashki23.github.io/markdown-latex.html)
## Footnotes

[^1]: [The Fractal Geometry of Nature - Benoit B. Mandelbrot - Google Livros](https://books.google.pt/books?id=0R2LkE3N7-oC&redir_esc=y)
[^2]: [Are Fractals or Fractal Curves Differentiable?](https://nnart.org/are-fractals-differentiable/)
[^3]: [How to Draw Fractals by Hand: A Beginner's Guide](https://nnart.org/how-to-draw-fractals-by-hand-a-beginners-guide/)
[^4]: [Complete List of Books by Benoit Mandelbrot](https://nnart.org/complete-list-of-books-by-benoit-mandelbrot/)
[^5]: [How Are Fractals Used in Technology and Engineering?](https://nnart.org/how-are-fractals-used-in-technology-and-engineering/)
[^6]: [Style Guide: How Did Jackson Pollock Paint?](https://nnart.org/style-guide-jackson-pollock/)
[^7]: [How Do Fractals Appear in Nature? 10 Outstanding Examples](https://nnart.org/fractals-in-nature/)
[^8]: [How Are Fractals Used in Technology and Engineering?](https://nnart.org/how-are-fractals-used-in-technology-and-engineering/)
